# Single nucleotide polymorphisms associated with Caco-2 cytotoxicity of Bacillus cereus group strains

## Authors: Cassidy Prince, Taejung Chung, Kayla Kimble, Tyler Chandross-Cohen Martin Wiedmann, Sophia Johler, Jasna Kovac

### Abstract:
Bacillus cereus sensu lato (s.l.) encompasses strains that cause foodborne illness and anthrax and strains with beneficial agricultural and industrial applications. While the risk of anthrax or emetic intoxication is reliably predicted by the presence of corresponding virulence genes, predicting diarrheal foodborne illness risk based on the presence of enterotoxin genes is unreliable. In this study, we assessed cytotoxicity against Caco-2 human gut cells using a diverse collection of B. cereus s.l. isolates from all eight panC phylogenetic groups and conducted genomic analyses to identify features predictive of cytotoxicity. We discovered that isolates from panC groups I, IV, and V exhibited significantly higher cytotoxicity than other groups, though isolates from other groups have been associated with illness. Our analysis using logistic and random forest regression models indicated that while enterotoxin gene presence can be a sensitive indicator of cytotoxicity, this approach lacks specificity. Using logistic regression models, we identified 21 nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within enterotoxin gene sequences that predicted cytotoxicity more effectively than the presence of enterotoxin genes, offering higher specificity and comparable sensitivity. All SNPs had accuracy and precision values greater than 0.7. Additionally, random forest regression models highlighted panC group, SNPs within enterotoxin gene regions critical for virulence, and full hbl operon presence as the most important predictors of cytotoxicity. The robust sensitivity, specificity, and physiological importance of these SNPs make them promising markers for enhancing strain-based risk assessment.
